Add the post about OCaml's module system (#69)
mrkkrp/markkarpov.com: post/what-humped-critter-has-to-teach-us.md

---

> title: What humped critter has to teach us?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: What a humped critter has to teach us?
```

desc: The post compares OCaml's module system with Haskell's type classes.
date:
  published: September 28, 2019
---

![Camels](/static/img/camels.png)

While attending the [MigareOS hack retreat][retreat] in Marrakesh (Morocco)
I met some interesting people and learned a couple of new things. In
particular, I met a creature I had never met before—Camel, *the ship of
desert*.

I will never forget the calm and profound look of that camel. Sage eyes of

> the animal expressed little interest in me, as well as in mundane details of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the animal, which expressed little interest in me, as well as in mundane details of
```

the situation in general. Some may think that it's sheer arrogance on his

> part and I concur. But the camel has serious reasons to look arrogant even

Reviewer: ```suggestion
part and I concur. But the camel has serious reasons to look arrogant, even
```

though he is not as pure as some and his life is not the easiest, for he

> lives in a desert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lives in the desert.
```

## OCaml and Haskell

OCaml and Haskell may be closer to each other than to any other popular
programming languages, some differences are:

* OCaml is strict, while Haskell is ~~lazy~~, err… non-strict.
* OCaml has polymorphic variants and objects, which are essentially a form
  of row-types. On the other hand, Haskell has a few unique features of its
  own.

> * OCaml has an interesting approach to organization of its modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* OCaml has an interesting approach to the organization of its modules.
```

Author: I'm not sure about this one.

In my opinion, the module system is the most remarkable feature of OCaml.
This is why I'm going to talk only about it in this post. It's also a good
opportunity to see how it relates to Haskell's type classes.

### Simple example

Let's start with an example. A simple module containing a type for something
like Haskell's `Text` could look like this:

```ocaml
type t = ...

> (* OCaml programmers rarely write type annotations for the functions *)

Reviewer: Maybe “add type annotations to functions”

let empty = ...
let singleton char = ...
let index text n = ...
let length text = ...
```

The `t` type is a common idiom in OCaml. Modules are usually fine-grained,

> so that every type gets its own module. We will see later more reasons for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so that every type gets its own module. Later we will see more reasons for
```

doing it this way.

A Haskeller might think now of what bothers Haskellers the most: if every

> type gets its own module, *how long the import section in OCaml could be*?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type gets its own module, *how long is the import section in OCaml*?
```

Author: Solved it differently.

The answer is: *around 1 or 2 lines!*

Suppose we store the module above in a file called `text.ml`, then we can
refer to the text type as `Text.t` and to the functions as e.g.
`Text.empty`. You only use top-level `open` (analogous to Haskell's simple,
unqualified `import`) for very few selected modules specially designed to be
“opened” globally. It usually includes a sort of prelude. Everything else is

> accessed by specifying name of the module locally, and who can argue that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
accessed by specifying the name of the module locally, and who can argue that
```

this is not a good practice?

OCaml has some nice syntax to encourage opening modules locally:

```ocaml
let average x y =
  let open Int64 in
  x + y / of_int 2
```

Here, we can refer to `Int64.(/)` as `(/)` and to `Int64.of_int` as `of_int`
inside of `let open`. The alternative syntax uses parentheses to do the
same:

```ocaml
let average x y =
  Int64.(x + y / of_int 2)
```

### Module signature and implementation

Another detail is that we do not see an export section in the snippet above.
In fact, OCaml keeps *module signatures* separated from *module
implementations*. Module signatures are usually stored in a different file

> with extension `.mli`. `text.mli` file in our case could look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with extension `.mli`. `text.mli` in our case could look like this:
```

```ocaml
type t

val empty : t
val singleton : char -> t
val index : t -> int -> char
val length : t -> int
```

Module signatures work as a boundary that hides implementation details. For
example, above we just say that the type we operate on is `t` and we do not
export its constructors (that would happen if we wrote `=` with definition
after `type t`), so it stays abstract.

> What's more, relation between module signatures and module implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What's more, the relation between module signatures and module implementations
```

is exactly the same as between types and values. We could define a module
signature in a standalone fashion like this:

```ocaml
module type Text = sig
  type t

  val empty : t
  val singleton : char -> t
  val index : t -> int -> char
  val length : t -> int
end
```

A particular module implementation may or may not match the signature. An
implementation matches if it declares all the mentioned types and values and

> their signatures match provided that the abstract type `t` is substituted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their signatures match, provided that the abstract type `t` is substituted
```

> with its “real” implementation type.

Reviewer: You could do a small bulleted list here for greater emphasis:

An implementation matches if

* it declares all the mentioned types and values and
* their signatures match

provided that the abstract …

Author: I think it's an overkill. Will keep it as is.

### Functors

*Functors* are functions from module to module (although functors and
functions do not share the same syntax). For example:

```ocaml
module type Eq = sig
  type t

  val eq : t -> t -> bool
end

module EqFromIndexed (Elt : Eq) (I : sig
  type t

  val index : t -> int -> Elt.t
  val length : t -> int
end) : (Eq with type t := I.t) = struct
  let eq x y =
    let len_x = I.length x in
    let len_y = I.length y in
    let rec go i =
      if i < len_x
      then I.index x i = I.index y i && go (i + 1)
      else true in
    if len_x = len_y
    then go 0
    else false
end
```

Here we first defined the type signature `Eq` which captures the necessary
minimum for talking about equality of things: the type `t` and the equality
function `eq`. Then we defined the functor `EqFromIndexed` which takes the

> module `Elt : Eq` providing equality check for elements, as well as the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
module `Elt : Eq`, providing an equality check for elements, as well as the
```

> module `I` providing two functions `index` and `length`. This allow us to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
module `I`, providing two functions `index` and `length`. This allow us to
```

check if two indexable containers are equal by simply traversing all

> elements. The definition of `EqFromIndexed` also features *anonymous module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
elements. The definition of `EqFromIndexed` also features an *anonymous module
```

signature*.

> We now apply `EqFromIndexed` to an anonymous module providing `eq` for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now apply `EqFromIndexed` to an anonymous module providing the `eq` for
```

> `char`s and `Text` that we already have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`char`s and the `Text` we already have:
```

satisfied (`EqFromIndexed` in OCaml and `eqFromIndexed` in Haskell).

Now the principle “one module per type” should make more sense. A module can
be considered as a collection of all defined operations for a particular
type `t` inside it, like collection of all methods of all type classes for a
type.

### Comparison

I think OCaml may be doing better than Haskell here. Here are some thoughts:

* **Naming convention.** As you can see, with OCaml's approach naming
  matters. If a module follows the conventions it can often be passed to a
  functor without having to define another module that can act as a bridge
  to satisfy the naming convention that a functor expects. This makes names
  in modules more predictable.

* **Complexity.** Type classes are a heavy feature in Haskell. It
  complicates things instead of keeping the system flat and simple. Look at,
  say, associated type families. You have normal “standalone” type families
  and then type families associated with a type class. Following OCaml's
  strategy we would have just 1 level instead of 2. OCaml already
  essentially has associated types (remember `Elt.t`?) and it's simply a

>   consequence of the fact that it has `type` definitions and its module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  consequence of the fact that it has `type` definitions and the structure of its module
```

or something

  system.

* **Efficiency.** OCaml's module system reminds me of Haskell's

>   [backpack][backpack]. In the OCaml land there is one problem less

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [backpack][backpack]. In OCaml-land there is one problem less
```

>   performance-wise. At least theory generating new functions with functors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  performance-wise. At least in theory, generating new functions with functors
```

  should produce fully specialized efficient code instead of constantly
  fearing that excessive polymorphism will make your code 100 times slower

>   and all these endless `INLINE` and `INLINEABLE` incantations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
, and it avoids all these endless `INLINE` and `INLINEABLE` incantations.
```

* **There are no orphans in the desert land.** OCaml's approach does not
  lead to orphan or overlapping instances because unlike Haskell's type
  classes it doesn't promise to establish a one-to-one correspondence
  between types and values/functions. Which leads us to…

* **Type classes as a way to go from type level to value level.** In modern
  Haskell type classes are often used to get a unique value (functions are
  also values in this context) associated with a type. Here, type class
  definition establishes what sort of value you can get, and instances
  define actual values. If we accept that the “uniqueness” property is
  useful, then we could argue that OCaml's doesn't have such a mechanism.
  [Edward Kmett likes this a lot.][type-classes-vs-the-world] But I'd say
  it's not a problem of module system vs type classes. If we have dependent
  types, we automatically can get one-to-one correspondence of similar kind.

## Conclusion

OCaml's modules are first-class values. They allow the language to be simple
yet expressive without the need for type classes providing a typed framework

> on higher level and make it easier to generate performant code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on a higher level, and they make it easier to generate performant code.
```

> This post is not meant to be a comprehensive guide to OCaml module system,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This post is not meant to be a comprehensive guide to the OCaml module system,
```

> so I'm not showing some usages, such as nested modules in single file or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so I'm not showing some usages, such as nesting modules in a single file or
```
